.TH GPG-ENCRYPT 1 "2026-02-15" "nemo-crypt 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gpg-encrypt \- encrypt files with OpenPGP from Nemo file manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gpg-encrypt.sh
.IR file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gpg-encrypt.sh
is a Nemo file manager integration script that provides a graphical interface
for encrypting files using GnuPG (GNU Privacy Guard). It supports both symmetric
(passphrase-based) and asymmetric (public key) encryption, with optional digital
signatures.

The script is typically invoked through Nemo's context menu when right-clicking
on files, but can also be run from the command line.
.SH OPTIONS
The script does not accept command-line options. All configuration is done through
interactive GTK dialogs.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I file
One or more files to encrypt. If multiple files are provided, the user will be
prompted to either encrypt them separately or package them together in an archive.
.SH ENCRYPTION MODES
.TP
.B Symmetric encryption
Uses a passphrase to encrypt the file. No GPG keys are required. Anyone with the
passphrase can decrypt the file.
.TP
.B Asymmetric encryption
Encrypts the file using one or more public keys. Only the holders of the
corresponding private keys can decrypt the file.
.SH FEATURES
.TP
.B Multi-file packaging
When encrypting multiple files, they can be packaged together in a single
archive (.zip, .tar.gz, or .tar.bz2) before encryption.
.TP
.B Digital signatures
Files can be optionally signed with your secret key during encryption,
allowing recipients to verify authenticity.
.TP
.B Key selection
Interactive dialog for selecting recipient public keys and signing keys.
.TP
.B Search and filter
Built-in search functionality to find specific keys in your keyring.
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B gnupg
GNU Privacy Guard for encryption operations
.TP
.B python3
Python 3 interpreter
.TP
.B python3-gi
Python GObject introspection bindings
.TP
.B gir1.2-gtk-3.0
GTK 3 introspection data
.TP
.B zenity
GTK dialog display tool
.TP
.B libnotify-bin
Desktop notification system
.TP
.B zip (optional)
For creating .zip archives
.TP
.B tar (optional)
For creating .tar.gz and .tar.bz2 archives
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.gnupg/
GnuPG configuration and keyring directory
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/nemo/actions/gpg-encrypt.nemo_action
Nemo action file for context menu integration
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GPG_CRYPT_DEBUG
If set to 1, enables debug output to stderr
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful encryption
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred (missing dependencies, user cancellation, encryption failure)
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Encrypt a single file (via command line):
.B gpg-encrypt.sh document.txt
.TP
Encrypt multiple files:
.B gpg-encrypt.sh file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt
.TP
Enable debug mode:
.B GPG_CRYPT_DEBUG=1 gpg-encrypt.sh document.txt
.SH SECURITY
.IP \(bu 2
Always verify recipient public keys before encrypting sensitive data
.IP \(bu 2
Use strong, unique passphrases for symmetric encryption
.IP \(bu 2
Temporary package files are automatically cleaned up on success or cancellation
.IP \(bu 2
Path traversal attacks are prevented through input validation
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gpg (1),
.BR gpg-decrypt-verify (1),
.BR nemo (1),
.BR zenity (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/ko4dfo/nemo-crypt/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Written by John Crouch.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 John Crouch.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
